elevated bed when the revolution started and they
abandoned the project. I don't know what the
revolution would have properly if they had had the
railroad. That's why they didn't have
communications to move the troops. Of course, the
revolution had to come and they had to win, but it
would have lasted longer.
I mean, it wouldn't have lasted as long. No, it
would have lasted longer if they had built the
Laredo because the federal troops would have had
access to these sections. Oh, I see, to the border
area. Well, just how important was this region up
and down the border, say, from Laredo south? Was it
important to the revolution? Well, they had to
take it because they couldn't get the supplies.
Once they got to the border town, they couldn't get
supplies. I see. The United States was in favor of
the revolution, with supplies and arms. So that's
why places like Nuevo Laredo and Guerrero and all
these places were important. Were there ever any
battles in Guerrero? No, no, no. Because they
didn't have an important motto. The people left,
the revolutionaries came, they ransacked the
town. I went to, after we left, a few days later, I
went to Guerrero again with another cousin of mine
to see what was, bring some more stuff. And we find
the doors broken and all the rooms empty, empty,
everything. Of your home, all your furniture and
everything? Furniture and clothing and
everything. Oh, and this is after you'd come
across the river. Yes, in April 1913, when we moved
to Zapata. A few days later, I went back to
Guerrero. My father sent me with another cousin in
Bahia. by horse carriage to see what we could
salvage. We didn't find anything. And there had
been... This is my other sister. My sister. One of
the six. One of the six sisters. How old are you? I'm
married to no one. This is my daughter. She's from
California. She's living in California. And this
is my daughter. And this is my mother. And what
they're teaching me, telling me that I have to
learn and remember again the weather here. It gets
rather pleasant in the morning. Yes, that's what I
thought. I'm glad to see you. I'm going. I'm going
to visit. For the Hawaiian visitors, summer
friends, my sister. Well, that's all.
But do
you like
a cup of tea, a cup of coffee? Anything?
A cup of coffee would be very nice.
to have a conference with him. And then one of the
times he told one of the reporters, will it be
possible that Francisco Madero will start a
revolution? He says, any fool can start a
revolution. It will take a genius to finish. And
then another thing he said, Unfortunately,
Mexican people are so far from God and so close to
the United States,
Well, I'd like for you to tell me a little bit more
about really a completely different subject, and
that is the building of Falcon Dam and the
refugees. You really have another set of refugees
when the floodwaters covered Guerrero, don't
you? Yeah, they covered a raw deal, the poor
people. because they just abandoned them. The
Mexican government did? No, the American side.
The American side? There was nothing on the
Mexican side. Oh, I thought Guerrero was. No,
Guerrero. They compensated the owners of the
houses in Guerrero and built houses for them on the
new Guerrero. Oh, the Mexican government did
that? Yes, on the Mexican side. But on the American
side, the ranches and everything, they got the
Rodil. They compensated them in a very poor way.
Well, tell me about it. How did it all come about?
Politics, I guess. They didn't have stronger
politicians to speak for them. Well, how did the
dam come about? How did all of this happen?
People in the valley, they needed some more water
because they were extracting water from the Rio
Grande for the valley, or so many, say, dozen
cities. Very well developed. On the Mexican side,
it was underdeveloped. So Mexico and the United
States agreed to build that dam so that they could
cut enough water to irrigate both the American
side and create an irrigation system on the
Mexican side. And then it was agreed on a 60-40%
basis. The United States would get 60% and the rest
was 40%. It took about 3 or 4 years to build it. It
cost about 40 or 50 million dollars. They did a good
job. And then on the Mexican side they built a
hydroelectric plant too. to serve Guerrero. I
think they bring the power to Nueva Guerrero. You
say the Mexican government built a whole new town.
Yes, they compensated them enough to build new
houses in the new Guerrero. Modern houses are
bricks or prefabricated houses. And did they
build them, you know, a new church and school and
this sort of thing? Yes, a church and a municipal
city hall. They moved a statue of Benito Juarez and
a clock. They called it a clock. Of course, it's out
of fix. That clock was purchased in France. They
had it in the city hall in the old Guerrero. It was a
very exact clock. Well, how did the people feel?
Were they satisfied with moving? They had
opportunities to plant in the old garage. They
didn't have pumps or anything to lift the water for
irrigation. And then they have this tourist trade
and the fishing industry. And then the
transportation. The new garage is a
transportation center. So it's really done
pretty, those people have done pretty well. And
then they have this irrigation system below the
river, down to Matamoros. But you say on the United
States side it wasn't that way. Because it was just
the ranch owners, it was nothing being a big deal.
Just a few ranchers that had their little houses
there. I don't think they got proper
indemnization for it. That's the general word.
When President Eisenhower came to inaugurate the
dam, the people were living in tents near Falcon.
She saw them there in tents. Well,
what about Nuzapata? Were the people given houses
or anything? I think... I don't know. They got some
sort of compensation. Some sort of compensation.
But not as much as on the Mexican side. No, I don't
know the details, but they are satisfied. And then
the talk has grown. It has grown. And then they talk
about highways from here to Zapata, and then from
Zapata to Quebronville, from Zapata down to the
valley. Has life changed a lot in New Zapata?
Modernized now. There are many
fishing industries, motels. Do you think people
are as satisfied as they were before? People in
Zapata, are they as satisfied? Certainly, better
than they were before. Because Zapata was a little
sleepy town too. There were not good
communications.
But back when it was actually happening, when the
lands were being flooded, were you ever down
there? Back when the lands were being flooded,
what was it like? When the water was building up
behind the dam? Well, it didn't affect the water
very much. Just on the creeks, the water just went
there. Not much. It didn't reclaim many lands, of
course. The federal government retained title to
certain distance from the highest level of the
water to the inland. A strip of land is owned by the
government, and the government in times allowed
them to graze their cattle. So they eventually got
involved. Then they discovered this livestock
industry is very profitable in oil, oil
production. That's nature. In deserts they have
oil, because nature compensates one thing for the
other.
Do you still have relatives in Guerrero? All my
uncles and aunts and everything, they are dead.
They're dead. Did their children come to the
States, or did they stay there? They lived there,
but we have lost track of them. Oh, I see. So they're
there, but you just don't visit very much. Our
closest relative was my uncle. He moved here to
Laredo and died here. Did he bring a family, too?
Sure, there could have been family. he brought
what his wife and his wife and children how many
children did he have you see how destiny works my
uncle had a little ranch where this seven sisters
land do you know about that no it's an old section of
seven sisters because he owned a ranch there
soledad was named and back in 1905 or 19 there was
He wanted, he had his eyes
toward Mexico. And see, he engaged in
surveillance and started to survey the landscape
and found that there were many lands that didn't
have any owners. Then he reported that to Mexico
City as a reward. They needed a big chunk of land,
about 18 or 20,000 acres. Then, so he sold it right
here. In the United States. Yes, and then went to
there and engaged in politics. In the meantime,
that land, he got millions now. If he had stayed
here, he would have been a millionaire. So he had
had a ranch. Was it a ranch he inherited? He owned a
ranch here. Had he inherited it or how did he get it?
He bought it. And he lived in Guerrero, but he
bought a ranch. No, he lived in the ranch and
then... Oh, he lived in the United States. I see.
And then from time to time, they would go to
Guerrero for two or three months to have the
children, then come back to the ranch. But it was
that misguided loyalty, I call it. Misguided
loyalty. Because in about 1907, he went back to
live in Guerrero and bought a big land and then
engaged in politics. And since he was a
conservative, he was one of the group of people
that controlled the town, the political life of
the town. And then became mayor. One night in
September 1912,
We were celebrating the independence. And then
after midnight, we lived across the street. We
heard a big explosion across from us. And then
immediately another big explosion. And then two
or three minutes later, another explosion fired
away. Then later on we found that these
revolutionaries had put two bombs in their house.
One on the big gate that all those houses had to put
the carriage in. They put one there and another one
in another door. It was a two-story house. But the
night was warm. They decided instead of sleeping
upstairs, they went to the yard and sleep there.
That saved them because they destroyed the second
story and blew it up. He would have killed them.
This was your uncle's family? My uncle. He was the
mayor. And the other one was another political
chief. They put it on the door, on the gate, but it
did some damage, but it didn't do anything to the
man, a man named Ramirez. That was one thing. And
then that was in September 1912. Then in 1913 is
when Madero was killed and Huerta took power. A few
days before April, they attacked the town. And my
uncle called policemen and certain individuals
armed on the roofs of the houses to defend the
government in case of attack. Well, they came and
attacked. And these fellows that he could pay just
quit. They got cold feet. They stay flat and didn't
do anything. So my uncle's sons, And my father had
to go to the ropes and repel the attackers, repel
them. Now, this uncle was your father's brother?
My father's brother. And what was his name?
Sinesio. Sinesio Gutierrez. So my children, they
cut the bones and they'd chop bones. They came in a
horseback. They found that they could not take it.
They went to assassinate my uncle. Did you get on
the roof with a gun too? No, no, I was very young
then. I went with my mother into the room. We had a
big house, 350, so we were safe there. So it lasted
about half an hour or so. They could not take it and
left. And then they knew who these men that put
those bombs were. They were part of the
revolutionaries. And my uncle asked help from the
governor of Tamaulipas to send in troops or
somebody. They could not send, so decided to quit.
Then at night, they left by foot, went from
Guerrero to a little ranch about a few miles south
of Zapata. Then in the morning we found that my
father wasn't there, my uncle wasn't there. Then
my aunt told them, no, they are safe already on the
American side. Now we are going to Zapata now. We
can go. But we cannot take anything just because we
have arms. Did you leave the very next day or was it
the next morning? The very next morning. It's two
miles from, of course it took us three hours to get
there by carriage. It wasn't really that far then.
No, it wasn't that far, but by carriage it took
longer to travel two miles. Well, your uncle then,
did he ever get any land on the United States side
after you moved here?
Your uncle, what did he do after he got to the States
to make a living? Did he lose his land in Mexico? No.
At that time the revolution was about over and he,
of course the land was, at that time livestock was
worth about $30 per head. During the revolution,
the hide were very valuable. So the revolution
would slaughter the livestock just to reclaim the
hide and ship it to the United States. So they stole
all his cattle. Oh, I see. Then when things became
settled, he leased the land, the subsoil, to one of
these American companies. They paid him very good
rental. Very good rental. And then, when the
revolution ended, he took over the ranch again.
This is his ranch in Mexico? In Mexico, yes. Did he
move back to Mexico? He stayed here, but he... But
he managed, his children managed the ranch.
There's another incident during the...
December 1913, 1913,
when we moved back here, my uncle sent his family to
the south and he and the trio of his children
remained in Nuevo Laredo because they organized,
the Guatagoros organized the a group of armed men
called the Defensa Social, Social Defense, and
they recruited all these civilians to bear arms,
and they are the ones who helped to defend the city.
My uncle remained there, so.
No.
Yes, my uncle moved here, the children stayed
there, that was on December. Now, on April, he
moved back to Nuevo Laredo. And then, when the
government troops burned the town and left the
city, they took my uncle and his boys with them.
Because they had no choice. They had to go with
them. So they went off with the government troops.
That was the troops of Huerta, Victoriana Huerta.
And they went as far as Villaldana. Yes, I know
where Villaldana is. So he returned, but I don't
know if I heard back or something. How did he get
away then from the government troops? Did they
just... When everything disbanded, the
government troops went to another route and
Pancho Villa met them. And then they had a battle
and won the battle and killed the general that had
defended Nuevo Laredo. It was General Guardiola.
He was a colonel and they made him general. They
killed him there. My uncle and his son came by
horseback and they were intercepted by the
Carranza troops and brought to Nuevo Laredo as
prisoners. Then they released the boys. And what
kept him, they said that they were going to execute
him. But finally they started to pull strings and
then finally they managed to, they captured him in
San Ignacio. That's where they captured him, in
San Ignacio. They were about to cross when they
caught him. So they relieved the boys and kept my
uncle. And then finally they got to, got the
concession to take him to Matamoros to try him
there. They took him by carriage. Took him to
Matamoros. From Matamoros, they took him to
Monterrey. Monterrey, they got him to pay him
about 45,000 pesos in Mexican currency. He had
money in the banks in Monterrey. He paid that
money. And they released him, and then he went by
way of Eagle Pass, and then to Laredo. to Laredo and
then from Laredo moved to Eagle Pass again. He
wanted to stay away from all this and then lived in
Eagle Pass for some time until the revolution
ended and come here and then lease the subsoil to
the American company and then got good money for
rentals. And then the livestock business, he was a
good businessman. But he apparently never wanted
to go back to Mexico after. After Guarno, he stayed
here. He managed, his boys, sons managed the
ranch. Well, he was very lucky not to be killed,
wasn't he? That's right, because they pulled the
strings and then moved him to Monterey. This Pan
American Highway crosses the ranch in the middle.
It's about 40 miles from here. where the ranch was
divided into parts. Between his sons? His
children. His children now have it. It was about
20,000 acres. Now where do his children live?
Well, some of them, there remain only one, two,
Three. Three children, grown-ups already. All
the others, I guess there were eight in the family.
All the other men have died. And then there are
about three women that are already married and
live here in Laredo. So now the land belongs to the
grandchildren. No, to his own children. To his own
children. And then they sold it to somebody else.
Oh, I see. It has been divided for them. But what I
say is that he made a big mistake in selling this
land here out of loyalty to go to Mexico. You think
he felt like it just wasn't right to own land in the
United States or what? No, no. He want to go to
Mexico. I see. And then he got to sell the land here.
Well, how had he happened to move up here in the
first place? That's why I say Guerrero has had a big
influence. People from Guerrero owned ranches
here. I see. And had owned ranches. Many
old-timers from Laredo came from Guerrero and
owned ranches here. I see. And they'd owned
ranches here since way back... Way back. More than
200 years ago. I see. So they... Let me tell you that
priest, uncle or great-granddaughter, was the
only one surveying all this. What did they call
this land? They divided from the river so much
frontage. I don't know how many, five or ten
thousand varas, and then they got 10,000 varas
back. Everyone, all the lands, the grants, had
access to the river. And then later on had been
subdivided. And then that priest is the one who
made all these surveys. Who surveyed all the
porciones? Porciones. Porciones. So most of
these porciones were owned by people who lived in
Guerrero. And here in Laredo too, the grants by
that Captain Sanchez that founded Laredo. That's
a funny story about Captain Sanchez. Many people
claim that they are descendants of Sanchez. It
happened that Sanchez never married.
Well, did he have children? That's what I say. He
had many children, but he never married. They are
proud to be the sons of God. He never married. Oh,
well. You can verify that from certain people. How
did he marry? He never married. But he was a good
man. He had a lot of kids. That's very interesting.
I knew he had children, but I didn't know he'd never
married. Were his children just by one wife, or did
he just have children all over the place? Several
women. Very interesting man. He was a fairly
wealthy man, wasn't he, Captain Sanchez? Well, in
that time wealth was measured by land and
livestock. Cows, horses, goats, that's how the
wealth was measured. Where did they sell their
stock back in those days? The livestock, how did
they sell it? They shipped it to San Antonio by land
and then from San Antonio down to Ecuador. And then
they had goats here. Did they ever move it south,
further south? No, not to Mexico. Mexico didn't
need them. They produced enough. But at that time a
coal steer was worth $30.
And they used to kill them just to salvage the skin,
the hide.
Well, it's changed a little bit now, hasn't it? No,
the steak is worth it. Thirty dollars? Well, not
quite that much, but steak for a family is about...
It's big enough. They are going to, for stealing
steaks from the supermarket. Oh, are they? Well,
what about meat prices in Mexico now? Have they
gone up? Meat is scarce in Mexico. You see, when we
came here, meat was nine cents a pound. Very cheap.
But there were no jobs or anything. There were no
automobiles. Just these carriages, course
carriages. Then they had an electric streetcar
that went to the cemetery.
It crossed the street from the east to west and then
to the cemetery.
So things have changed quite a bit. Life has
changed. Well, how do you feel? Are you glad that
the revolution came and you came here? I said, are
you glad that the revolution happened and you
ended up coming to this side? For me, it has been a
good life. Good life.
Well, I thank you very much.